Sustainability Glossary 2025

On the cover: Seeds collected for land rehabilitation at our 
Gove bauxite mine, Australia.
Our 2025 reporting suite
Scan the QR code or visit riotinto.com/reports
Many of our operations are located on land and 
waters that have belonged to Indigenous and  
land-connected Peoples for thousands of years.  
We respect their ongoing deep connection to,  
and their vast knowledge of, the land, water and 
environment. We pay our respects to Elders, both 
past and present, and acknowledge the important 
role Indigenous and land-connected Peoples play 
within communities and our business.
About this glossary
This glossary contains key terms and definitions used in our 
external sustainability reporting, with the aim of providing further 
explanations or details in the context of the Rio Tinto Group.

Basis of reporting glossary
Term
Definition
All injuries
All injuries refer to the combination of lost time injuries and medical treatment cases. All injuries exclude first 
aid injuries.
Annual allocation usage
Annual allocation usage is the actual water volume used from the operation’s permitted allocation over a calendar 
year.
Australian Carbon Credit 
Unit (ACCU)
An Australian Government-issued, tradable certificate that represents one tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent 
(CO₂e) either reduced or removed from the atmosphere through verified projects under Australia’s Emissions 
Reduction Fund (ERF). These projects include activities like reforestation, vegetation management, and savanna fire 
management. ACCUs are issued to individuals or businesses who run eligible projects under the ACCU Scheme 
and can be traded or sold on the Australian carbon market.
Biodiversity
Biodiversity is the variety of life on Earth – the different animals, plants and micro-organisms, their genes and the 
ecosystems in which they live.
Biodiversity baseline
A reference point describing the state of biodiversity in a given area at a specific time, used to measure change. 
(Source: Sustainability Directory)
Brownfield exploration
Brownfield exploration is directed at sustaining or growing our existing businesses. With processing infrastructure 
already in place, the cost of developing brownfield orebodies is usually lower than in a greenfield setting.
Carbon credits
A tradable unit issued by a recognised carbon crediting program that represents the reduction or removal of one 
tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) from the atmosphere. These credits are generated by projects that 
actively reduce greenhouse gas emissions or enhance carbon sequestration, such as afforestation, reforestation, 
renewable energy development or improved land management practices.
Category 1 quality water
Category 1 quality water is water of a high quality that may require minimal and inexpensive treatment (for example 
disinfection and pond settlement of solids) to raise the quality to appropriate drinking water standards. Category 1 
water has total dissolved solids (TDS) less than 1,000 milligrams per litre and pH between 6 and 8.5.
Category 2 quality water
Category 2 quality water is water of a medium quality that would require a moderate level of treatment such as 
disinfection, neutralisation, or removal of solids and chemicals to meet appropriate drinking water standards.
Category 2 water has total dissolved solids (TDS) between 1,000 and 5,000 milligrams per litre, or pH between 
4 and 6, or 8.5 and 10.
Typically, this category of water would be suitable for agricultural/livestock or irrigation use (based on local/
regional/national guidelines).
Category 3 quality water
Category 3 quality water is water of a low quality with individual constituents encompassing high values of total 
dissolved solids (TDS), elevated levels of dissolved metals or extreme levels of pH. It would require significant 
treatment to remove dissolved solids and metals, and to neutralise and disinfect to meet appropriate drinking water 
standards.
Category 3 water has TDS greater than 5,000 milligrams per litre, or TDS between 1,000-5,000 milligrams per litre 
or pH less than 4 or greater than 10.
Typically, this category of water would not be suitable for agricultural/livestock or irrigation use.
Chemically reactive 
mineral waste
Mineral waste that can cause environmental or health risks, such as generating acid rock drainage (ARD) or 
spontaneously combusting when exposed to air and water.
Community complaint
A complaint is a notification provided by a community member, group or institution to the business (Rio Tinto) that 
they have suffered some form of offence, detriment, impairment or loss, as a result of Rio Tinto activities.
Consumption (water)
Water consumption is the volume of water used by the site or operational facility and not returned to the water 
environment or a third party.
Contractor
A contractor is a person or organisation providing services to an employer at the employer’s workplace in line with 
agreed specifications, terms and conditions.
In the context of Rio Tinto’s health, safety and environmental standards, we classify contractors in 3 categories:
•	 Category 1: Individuals working on temporary contracts within existing operations.
•	 Category 2: Companies or individuals hired for a discrete project that will be carried out in a designated area 
separate from existing operations.
•	 Category 3: Companies or individuals contracted to carry out specific tasks or provide specified services within 
existing operations.
Direct economic 
contribution
Direct economic contribution is the total value of value add, payments to suppliers, mandated social contributions, 
payment to landowners and social investments during the year.
Discharge (water)
Water discharge is the volume of water removed from the site or operational facility to the environment and/or a 
third-party receiver.
Ecological benefits
Positive contributions of ecosystems to biodiversity and human wellbeing, such as clean water, carbon storage and 
soil fertility.
Ecological communities
Groups of interacting species living in the same area, forming a network of relationships within an ecosystem. 
(Source: Britannica)
Sustainability Glossary 2025
1
riotinto.com

Term
Definition
Ecological value
The importance of ecosystems or species in maintaining ecological processes, biodiversity and resilience.
Ecosystems
The interaction between living things and their environment, resulting in a specific natural system. The greater the 
biodiversity in an ecosystem, the more resilient it is to shocks – eg monoculture forestry vs natural forests.
Ecosystem services
Benefits people obtain from ecosystems, including provisioning, regulating, supporting, and cultural services.
Emission (air) incident
Emission (air) incident refers to an environmental incident in which materials, or energy, or both are released in an 
uncontrolled way into the atmosphere, or to emissions that are not compliant with applicable agreements, laws or 
licences, including dust, noise, vibration and blasting incidents.
Employee
An employee is a person in full- or part-time employment at a Rio Tinto business and listed on the payroll.
Energy Attribute 
Certificate (EAC)
A category of contractual instruments used in the energy sector to convey information about energy generation to 
other entities involved in the sale, distribution, consumption or regulation of electricity.
Energy use
Energy use includes energy associated with the combustion of fuels, as well as energy from electricity use and 
generation or other sources such as steam. Energy use for anodes and reductants is evaluated from a carbon 
balance or from anode raw material consumption.
Environment
The intersection of natural, social, and economic systems that the global mining and metals industry must manage 
to achieve sustainable development, including air, land and water, and their biodiversity and social interactions and 
dependencies. Environment refers to the surroundings an asset operates in, including air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, humans, and how they interrelate. 
Equity share
The equity share approach for greenhouse gas emissions reports the equity shares of operations, in particular the 
economic interest the company has in the asset. If the equity or ownership of an operation changes through the 
reporting year, the emissions reflect what the actual emissions were at each point in time across the period.
Fatal injury (FI)
When one or more person(s) dies as a result of an injury sustained in a work-related incident regardless of the time 
period separating the events. Lost and restricted days are not calculated for fatalities.
Fatal occupational 
illness (FOI)
When one or more person(s) dies as a result of an occupational illness sustained in a work-related incident 
regardless of the time period separating the events. Lost and restricted days are not calculated for fatalities.
Frequency rates
Frequency rates are used as a way to measure injury or illness performance, for example:
•	 All injury frequency rate (AIFR) = number of all injuries x 200,000/hours of exposure.
•	 Lost time injury frequency rate (LTIFR) = number of lost time injuries x 200,000/hours of exposure.
•	 Rate of new cases of occupational illness (NCOI) = number of all new cases of occupational illnesses x 10,000/
number of employees (based on average monthly statistics).
We use AIFR to assess performance against our goal of zero safety injuries for all employees and all categories 
of contractors.
We calculate our health target (rate of new cases of occupational illness) using employee data only, for managed 
operations only. While we record diagnosed occupational illnesses for contractors, we do not use this data within 
the calculation of the rate of new cases of occupational illness. Developing operations and acquisitions after 
31 December in the previous reporting year are also excluded when assessing performance against these targets. 
Divested and closed operations are removed from the baseline when assessing performance against these targets.
Freshwater
Freshwater is potable water or high-quality raw water that satisfies Category 1 water quality requirements.
Freshwater used
This category aligns with our external Global Reporting Initiative reporting requirements.
Freshwater used is a water volume calculated using the combined volume of:
•	 imported surface water (water provided by a third party for our use)
•	 onsite impounded water used in process applications
•	 imported groundwater
•	 onsite groundwater, except that extracted for ground control (dewatering) and discharged without use
•	 freshwater withdrawn for use as cooling water that is chemically, physically or biologically modified at the final 
point of discharge and/or returned to the environment with a temperature change of more than 5°C.
Freshwater withdrawn
Freshwater withdrawn is a water volume calculated using the combined volume of:
•	 imported surface water (water provided by a third party for our use)
•	 onsite impounded water used in process applications
•	 imported and onsite groundwater
•	 freshwater withdrawn for use as cooling water that is chemically, physically or biologically modified at the final 
point of discharge and/or returned to the environment with a temperature change of more than 5°C.
Freshwater withdrawn does not include:
•	 category 2 or category 3 quality water
•	 overflow of water in heavy rain conditions from impoundments which has not had its quality significantly 
changed by inputs and seepage
•	 water diverted to avoid contamination, but not subsequently withdrawn or intercepted for use (other 
managed water)
•	 water withdrawn and directly supplied to others, such as for use in agricultural or pastoral properties,  
for export to third parties or for town use
•	 freshwater withdrawn and used for hydropower generation.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
2
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Term
Definition
Global Reporting 
Initiative (GRI)
The GRI Standards form a globally recognised, voluntary framework for sustainability reporting that enables 
organisations to disclose their economic, environmental, and social impacts. They consist of Universal, Sector, and 
Topic Standards, helping organisations identify material topics and report consistently across industries.
Greenfield
Greenfield is a term used to describe investments, sites or projects that have been previously undeveloped or 
unexplored for commercial purposes.
Greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions
GHG emissions are the 7 groups of gases we report against as included in the Kyoto Protocol: carbon dioxide 
(CO2), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), perfluorinated carbon compounds (PFCs) 
and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6). Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) emissions are not present/applicable in Rio Tinto’s 
inventory. Details about our reporting thresholds and basis can be found in the Sustainability Fact Book “GHE 
emissions methodology” tab.
GHG emissions baseline
In greenhouse emissions reporting, a base year of 2018 has been selected to compare abatement and emissions 
reductions over time. The baseline is an adjusted equity reporting basis that allows comparability by aligning the 
base year and subsequent years to the current asset portfolio and economic interest.
GHG Protocol
The Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol establishes comprehensive global standardised frameworks to measure and 
manage GHG emissions from private and public sector operations, value chains and mitigation actions.
The GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard provides requirements and guidance for 
companies and other organisations preparing a corporate-level GHG emissions inventory.
The standard covers the accounting and reporting of 7 greenhouse gases – carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, 
hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulphur hexafluoride and nitrogen trifluoride.
High quality water
High quality water is water that satisfies Category 1 and Category 2 quality requirements. This category aligns with 
our external ICMM reporting requirements.
# HIV/AIDS
HIV/AIDS refers to a disease of the human immune system (acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS) 
caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Hours of exposure
Hours of exposure is the total number of actual hours where one or more employees/contractors are working or 
are present as a condition of their employment and are carrying out activities related to their employment duties.
For employees: this can be calculated either as “planned time + overtime – all absences” or actual time (collected 
by gate pass or timesheet systems) or through reasonable estimates made by a Rio Tinto supervisor.
For contractors: hours worked are either provided by the vendor or through reasonable estimates made by a 
Rio Tinto supervisor. These hours are recorded by month, vendor, work area and organisation unit to reflect the 
total time spent by contractors on our sites.
Human rights
Human rights are fundamental rights that all individuals have as human beings, regardless of race, sex, nationality, 
ethnicity, language, religion, sexuality or any other status. They include the right to life and liberty, freedom from 
slavery and torture, freedom of opinion and expression, and the right to work and education.
Human Rights Impact 
Assessment (HRIA)
Human Rights Impact Assessment is a process to identify and assess actual human rights impacts that have 
occurred, or are occurring, due to business activities. HRIAs are conducted by reputable external experts and 
include rightsholder engagement.
Human Rights Risk 
Assessment (HRRA)
Human Rights Risk Assessment is a process to identify and assess potential human rights impacts that may arise 
from business activities, and to identify preventative and mitigative controls. HRRAs are conducted by an internal 
cross-functional team, sometimes with the support of external consultants, and may include input from external 
stakeholders and rightsholders.
Incident
An incident is a single event or continuous/repetitive series of events that results in, or could have resulted in, one 
or more of the following:
•	 an occupational injury or illness
•	 damage to physical assets (plants or equipment), the environment, process, product or reputation
•	 disruption to a community
•	 exposure to legal liability
•	 a security threat
We evaluate an incident both by its actual consequence and the maximum reasonable outcome for each of these 
potential impacts.
Indigenous and  
land-connected Peoples
There is no universally applicable definition of Indigenous People or land-connected People. The term  
“land-connected Peoples” broadly refers to groups who have enduring cultural and historical connections to 
particular lands, waters, territories and/or ecosystems. They may also consider themselves to be Indigenous 
Peoples, which generally refers to groups that self-identify as a cultural group, sharing common origins,  
history and language, and often have a history of colonial settlement and dispossession. Indigenous and  
land-connected Peoples do not always hold legally recognised land rights and are not always formally recognised 
as customary landowners.
Injury
Injury refers to any injury such as a cut, fracture, sprain or amputation resulting from a work-related event during a 
single shift. All occupational injuries are reported as safety incidents with safety impact. All occupational injuries 
must be recorded for employees and contractors regardless of contractor category.
Key products
Key products are defined as commodities where we obtain more than 10% of our total consolidated sales revenue. 
Our key products are principally aluminium, copper and iron ore.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
3
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Term
Definition
Land footprint
A land footprint is land that has been disturbed for mining, processing and related activities including infrastructure 
(whether currently disturbed or rehabilitated), as at 31 December of the current reporting period.
Life cycle assessment
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is the compilation and evaluation of the inputs, outputs and the potential 
environmental impacts of a product system throughout its life cycle.
Lost day injury (LDI) or 
occupational illness
A lost day injury (LDI) or occupational illness is an injury or occupational illness that results in one or more  
days/shifts away from work, excluding the day of the incident. The number of lost or restricted calendar days and 
shifts reported for lost day injuries/illness must be counted until the person is cleared by a medical practitioner and 
either returns in a full-time unrestricted capacity to their pre-injury/illness role or (in the case of a recordable work 
injury) is permanently moved to another role.
Lost time injury or 
occupational illness
A lost time injury or occupational illness is the total of fatal, lost day and restricted work day injuries or illnesses.
Low quality water
Low quality water is water that satisfies Category 3 quality requirements. This category aligns with our external 
ICMM reporting requirements.
Major hazard
Potential to cause catastrophic event(s) such as a tailings and/or water storage facility failure, extreme weather 
event, fires and explosions, critical equipment failure, geotechnical event or loss of containment resulting in one or 
several of the following impacts: fatalities, major impact to environment/community, or extended cessation of 
operations, and/or significant financial loss.
The characteristics of a major hazard may include:
•	 the storage and/or use of significant amounts of energy and/or hazardous materials
•	 the potential to place a substantial number of individuals “at risk”
•	 special implications with regard to risk assessing, arranging emergency controls, managing hazards, or dealing 
with abnormal situations.
Managed operation
A managed operation is an operation where:
•	 Rio Tinto wholly owns the operation
•	 A management agreement is in place naming Rio Tinto as the manager, or
•	 Rio Tinto management systems and processes are fully implemented.
Mandated social 
contributions
Mandated social contributions are non-discretionary commitments which Rio Tinto is mandated to make under a 
legally binding agreement, by a regulatory authority or otherwise by law. They are made by Rio Tinto to a third party 
to deliver social, economic and/or environmental benefits for a community.
Materiality
Materiality in sustainability is the threshold at which an issue or topic becomes important enough to be reported 
externally, taking into account the impacts and risks, and the perceived importance from stakeholders.
Medical treatment  
case injury or 
occupational illness
An injury or illness that results in loss of consciousness or requires “medical treatment” but does not result in any 
lost or restricted days/shifts.
Medical treatment examples:
•	 Administering prescription medication or non-prescription medication at prescription strength (even if the 
prescription is not collected or the medication not taken; excluding those circumstances listed in the advice 3 of 
section 7 – Guidance for classification of guidance for determining medical treatment case injury/occupational 
illness (MTCI/MTCOI) in the Classification of injury and illness guidance note. 
•	 Use of stitches, staples or glue to close a wound. Where glue is used to protect a wound (that does not require 
sutures) as a precaution against infection in wet environments and in place of an adhesive dressing, this may be 
considered a first aid treatment if supported in writing by a doctor or registered nurse. 
•	 Use of an eye patch beyond the shift in which the incident occurred and as a result of actual injury/damage (ie 
not for precautionary purposes).
•	 Administration of oxygen to treat a person following work-related injury or illness (eg as a result of altitude 
sickness, actual or suspected decompression sickness, or exposure to toxic substances where the person is 
exhibiting symptoms of exposure).
•	 Professional immobilisation of a limb, such as splints with rigid stays, casts or slings (beyond first aid such as 
temporary immobilisation devices while transporting a patient, or use of rigid finger guards).
•	 Any other treatment that is not defined in the Rio Tinto Health, Safety, Environment & Security and Communities 
(HSESC) definitions database under the definition of “First Aid Case”.
Medical treatment does not include: 
a.	visits to a physician or other licensed health care professional solely for observation or counselling
b.	the conduct of diagnostic procedures, such as x-rays or blood tests, and the administration of prescription 
medications used solely for diagnostic purposes (eg eye drops to dilate pupils), or as a single course 
administered on first visit for a minor injury or discomfort.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
4
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Term
Definition
Mineral waste
Mineral waste includes waste rock, tailings and slag.
•	 Waste rock is composed of soils or bedrock that are removed to uncover or access ore during mining.
•	 Tailings are a by-product of mining, consisting of the processed rock or soil left over from the separation of the 
commodities of value from the rock or soil within which they occur.
•	 Slag is generated by smelting operations and is the glassy material that remains after metals, such as copper, 
have been removed from the ore concentrate.
Mineral waste is typically produced in very large volumes, and its handling and storage can directly impact the land.
Mineral waste is usually permanently stored onsite, where it is used as in-pit backfill or held in engineered 
repositories. Most mineral waste is inert, but some is chemically reactive and must be appropriately handled to 
protect people, wildlife and water quality.
Mitigation Hierarchy
A framework for managing biodiversity impacts through a sequence: Avoid → Minimise → Restore → Offset 
residual impacts.
Modern slavery
Modern slavery refers to situations of exploitation that a person cannot refuse or leave because of threats, 
violence, coercion, deception and/or abuse of power. Situations include human trafficking, forced labour, debt 
bondage, forced marriage and the worst forms of child labour.
Musculo-skeletal illness
Musculo-skeletal illness is a condition of the musculo-skeletal system associated with repetitive work-related 
trauma and/or exposure over time, lasting more than one shift (see also occupational illness).
A case is reportable where a medical practitioner diagnoses a musculo-skeletal disease that meets defined 
diagnostic criteria, is due to repeated workplace exposure (other than vibration) and results in medical treatment, 
restricted work days, lost days or permanent damage. This includes recurring musculo-skeletal conditions counted 
as a new case and reported only if the medical practitioner thinks the worker had fully recovered from the previous 
condition. This can include repetitive strain injuries, also known as occupational overuse syndrome.
myVoice
myVoice is Rio Tinto’s confidential reporting program. The program is a key part of our commitment to living 
Rio Tinto values, building trust, and creating a respectful and inclusive workplace where people feel safe and 
comfortable to speak freely and provide feedback.
Anyone who suspects or witnesses potential misconduct related or connected to Rio Tinto’s business can make a 
report via myVoice. This includes current and former employees, shareholders, contractors and their 
subcontractors, external consultants, suppliers, customers, service providers, partners, and members of the public 
or the communities where we operate. The content reported and the right to anonymity may be subject to local 
laws. The report intake and hotline system are independently operated by a third-party service provider.
Concerns are classified in the following case classes: personnel; business integrity; health, safety and environment; 
communities; finance; information security; legal; myVoice process; and other.
myVoice case class 
– business integrity
Matters regarding potential conflicts of interest, bribes, facilitation payments or kickbacks, fraud, theft, misuse of 
company resources, inappropriate benefits/gifts, and any other potentially unethical or unfair business practices.
This also includes matters involving alleged circumvention of business integrity processes and controls, and alleged 
breaches of policies, procedures and standards. 
myVoice case class 
- communities
Matters regarding the company’s activities and relationship with communities and Indigenous Peoples. Concerns 
raised regarding human rights including potential modern slavery indicators, child labour and allegations of other 
unfair labour practices
myVoice case class 
- finance
Concerns raised regarding falsification or misrepresentation, or failure to keep accurate financial records. Includes 
financial reporting irregularities, such as making false financial statements internally or externally and other 
activities including altering or destroying company financial records and providing false information on tax filing.
myVoice case class - 
health, safety and 
environment
Matters regarding workplace health, workplace safety and security issues, including potential breaches of safety 
laws and regulations, safety policies, procedures, standards and local directives, local safety hazards, unsafe 
working conditions and practices, and any other potential or actual systemic failures or negative effects on 
employee health and safety.
Also includes records of security incidents and concerns about workplace conditions that may represent 
dangerous physical situations to employees and others. For environmental-related cases, this includes concerns 
regarding potential harm to the environment or a situation that may potentially cause actual or perceived loss or 
damage to the environment (and also to people, and plant and equipment).
myVoice case class 
- information security
Matters involving alleged breaches of cyber security leading to accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, 
unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed.
myVoice case class – 
legal
Matters regarding insider trading and issues with, or alleged breaches of, contracts, the Supplier Code of Conduct, 
copyright or trademarks, and intellectual property. Matters may also include potentially deliberate or inadvertent 
disclosure or misappropriation of confidential information.
myVoice case class – 
myVoice process
Matters involving potential misalignment with the criteria for effective grievance mechanisms in the UN Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights, or failure to perform a role, duty or process related to the myVoice program.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
5
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Term
Definition
myVoice case class – 
other
Other matters not included in a defined case class.
myVoice case class 
– personnel
Matters including, but not limited to, all forms of alleged bullying, harassment, sexual misconduct, discrimination and 
other interpersonal behaviours.
Also includes potential failure to report misconduct, untruthful reporting, retaliation against those that have raised 
concerns or for being suspected of raising a concern, and concerns related to unfair HR processes including, but 
not limited to, recruitment practices, benefits and compensation, job assignment and performance, breaches of 
labour standards, and issues related to payroll, remuneration, and benefits and compensation.
Nature
Nature, as described by the ICMM is all life on Earth (ie biodiversity), together with the geology, water, climate and 
all other inanimate components that comprise our planet. Nature can also be understood through a construct of 4 
physical realms – land, ocean, freshwater and atmosphere, each of which interact with people and society.
Natural capital
The stock of natural resources (eg soil, water, biodiversity) that provide ecosystem services and benefits to people.
Nature positive
Halting and reversing biodiversity loss to improve species abundance, ecosystem resilience, and natural processes.
Nature Positive Initiative
The Nature Positive Initiative gathers some of the world’s largest sustainable business and finance coalitions; 
standards, disclosure and targets frameworks; global conservation organisations; and science, subnational 
governance and Indigenous knowledge networks, to drive alignment around use of the term “nature positive” and 
support broader, longer-term efforts to deliver nature-positive outcomes.
Nature Position 
Statement
The Nature Position Statement is an ICMM requirement setting out the ICMM members’ approach to contributing 
to a nature positive future guided by the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF) 2030 targets and 
ICMM’s existing commitments in relation to Indigenous Peoples, climate change, water and respecting human rights 
as per the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs).
Nature target
Group-wide strategic target to support the progress and delivery of nature-related commitments and standards.
New case/recurrence
New case/recurrence is an injury or illness classed as new because the employee has not previously experienced 
an injury or illness of the same type, or when the employee has completely recovered from the previous case and a 
new incident has caused the condition to reappear. If not, then additional time lost is linked back to the original 
injury or illness and is considered a recurrence of the original injury or illness.
Noise-induced hearing 
loss (NIHL)
Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) is hearing-loss-related noise exposure as assessed by an occupational 
physician, an audiologist or other equivalent qualified professional. Audiometric tests must be pure tone, air 
conduction, hearing threshold examinations, including the test frequencies 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 kHz and 8 kHz as a 
minimum. A loss without recovery plus a history of noise exposure should also be regarded as NIHL.
For cases meeting the above criteria, we consider the following to determine whether a case of NIHL meets our 
reporting criteria:
## 1.	 Has the person been occupationally exposed to noise (eg > 85 dB(A) TWA)?
## 2.	Have they also sustained a standard threshold shift (see definition)?
## 3.	Is there also non-age-corrected average hearing loss over 2, 3 and 4 KHz of the audiogram, in one or both ears, 
of more than or equal to 25 dB as compared with audiometric zero?
If the case meets these criteria, it should be recorded as a permanent damage operational illness (PDOI) if it carries 
a whole-body impairment of ≥ 30% as per the American Medical Association guidelines 5th edition. If the hearing 
loss is due to age factors alone, this is not work-related and should be excluded. Hearing loss due to a one-time 
high exposure is considered an injury. This excludes category 2 and 3 contractors.
No Net Loss
A state where project-related biodiversity impacts are balanced by avoidance, minimisation, restoration and 
offsetting measures.
Non-mineral waste	
Non-mineral waste is primarily composed of the auxiliary materials that support our mining and mineral processing 
operations.
It includes familiar materials such as used scrap metal, wood, hydrocarbons, tyres, used batteries, plastics, and 
office waste, as well as more specialised waste such as spent pot liners from aluminium smelters. Non-mineral waste 
is produced in much smaller volumes than mineral waste, and is most commonly managed through recycling, offsite 
treatment and disposal, or placement in on or offsite engineered landfills.
Occupational illness
Occupational illness is an illness or disease, as distinct from an injury. One event cannot be both. An occupational 
illness or disease results from a workplace-related exposure of more than one shift, such as noise-induced hearing 
loss (NIHL) or carpal tunnel syndrome. A person can only be diagnosed once with the same occupational illness or 
disease, unless they have completely recovered from the original case. All occupational illnesses are reported as 
health incidents with health impact.
Also see entries for fatal injury or occupational illness; lost day injury (LDI) or occupational illness; lost time injury or 
occupational illness; medical treatment case injury or occupational illness; and restricted work day injury or 
occupational illness.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
6
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Term
Definition
Occupied building
An occupied building is a building, whether permanent or temporary (portable), that is intended to be occupied. 
This is typically a building where at least 2 people do a significant portion of their work or where people may gather, 
even for a short time (such as crib rooms). Buildings that employees visit infrequently to do brief tasks or monitor a 
process are not typically defined as occupied buildings.
Operational emissions 
intensity (t CO₂e/t Cu eq)
Operational emissions intensity (t CO₂e/t Cu eq) (equity) measures greenhouse gas emissions from Rio Tinto’s 
operating activities, expressed as tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO₂e) per tonne of copper equivalent 
(t Cu eq) production, calculated on an equity share basis. Copper equivalent production expresses Rio Tinto’s 
share of sales and production volumes converted into a copper equivalent basis using long‑term consensus 
commodity prices.
Operational land holdings
Operational land holdings are split into 2 categories:
## 1.	 Land disturbed for mining, processing and related activities, including rehabilitated land. This is known as our 
operational footprint.
## 2.	Land outside our operational footprint area, which may be used in the future for mining, processing and related 
activities, as well as other land uses. This is known as our land holding balance.
Operational withdrawal 
(water)
Withdrawal is the volume of water received by the site or operational facility from the water environment and/or a 
third-party supplier used in operations. Excludes other managed water.
Other managed water 
(water) – previously 
known as diversions
Other managed water is water that is actively managed by a site or operational facility but not used for any 
operational purposes. Other managed waters are reported as either withdrawals or discharges, depending 
upon circumstances.
Payments to landowners
Payments to landowners are non-discretionary compensation payments made by Rio Tinto to third parties under 
land access, mine development, native title, impact benefit and other legally binding compensation agreements.
Permanent damage injury 
or illness
Permanent damage injury or occupational illness refers to greater than 30% body impairment as per the American 
Medical Association Guidelines (5th edition) with a timeframe of which is likely to be one year or greater to be 
considered permanent.
Permitted surface 
water allocation
Permitted surface water allocation is the water volume a regulatory authority has licensed, permitted or approved 
for the operation to extract and use.
Plague
Plague is an infectious disease caused by the bacteria Yersinia pestis, usually found in small mammals and their 
fleas. It is transmitted between animals through fleas. Humans can be infected through:
•	 an infected flea’s bite
•	 unprotected contact with infectious bodily fluids or contaminated materials
•	 inhaling respiratory droplets/small particles from a patient with pneumonic plague.
Power purchase 
agreement (PPA) 
A contractual arrangement to procure electricity, typically from renewable sources, at an agreed price. These 
agreements define supply volumes, pricing terms, and compliance obligations, and may be structured physically 
(where delivery of energy takes place) or financially (such as in the case of a virtual power purchase agreement).
Process
Process means the activities associated with the process of mining or refining, which include mining, milling, 
slurrying, washing ore, suppressing dust, treating wastewater/sewerage, generating power, operating ancillary 
services (such as camp, canteen, offices), irrigating rehabilitated land and washing down.
Process safety
A process safety hazard is a material with hazardous properties or energy (such as pressure or temperature or 
velocity) that can result in any of the following scenarios with an immediate consequence:
a.	chemical and physical explosion (including molten materials)
b.	fires involving hazardous material storage, handling, and/or produced
c.	loss of containment of toxic, asphyxiant, corrosive, reactive, hot materials (including molten materials), or 
contaminants in bulk
d.	engulfment or physical impact or contamination from failure of bulk storage or the containment envelop 
of equipment
e.	open circuit of electricity for the process of reduction in a potline
f.	 third-party risks of the same nature (as listed above), that could have a High or Very High health, safety, 
environment, or community consequence (the inherent consequence) on Rio Tinto managed operations, 
projects, and legacy sites.
Product stewardship
Product stewardship refers to the end-to-end life cycle management of products-minimising risks while maximising 
environmental, health, safety, and societal benefits. It supports Rio Tinto’s ambition to be a supplier of choice by 
ensuring that products are responsibly produced, used, and managed through to end-of-life.
Renewable energy 
certificates (RECs)
An REC is a market-based instrument that represents the property rights to the environmental, social, and other 
non-power attributes of renewable electricity generation. RECs are issued when one megawatt-hour (MWh) of 
electricity is generated and delivered to the electricity grid from a renewable energy resource. REC definitions and 
uses vary depending on the jurisdictions and are also known under different names such as Guarantees of Origin 
(GOs) in the EU, Renewable Energy Guarantees of Origin (REGOs) in the UK, or more generally as Energy Attributes 
Certificates (EACs).
Sustainability Glossary 2025
7
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Term
Definition
Restricted work day injury 
or occupational illness 
Injury or occupational Illness where, as a result:
a.	the employee was assigned to another job on a temporary basis
b.	the employee worked at a permanent job less than full time, or 
c.	the employee worked at his or her permanently assigned job but could not perform all the duties normally 
connected with it. 
Restricted work activity occurs when the employee, because of the job-related injury, is physically or mentally 
unable to perform all or any part of his or her normal assignment during all or any part of the normal workday or 
shift after which the injury occurs.
Rio Tinto Management 
System
The Rio Tinto Management System supports standardisation of corporate and business health, safety, environment 
and communities management processes. The system is designed on the principles of leadership and planning, 
management of risk through operational control, and continuous improvement through performance review, as is 
the intent of common international standards such as ISO 14001:2004, ISO 9001:2001.
Safeguard Mechanism
The Safeguard Mechanism is the Australian Government’s policy for reducing emissions at Australia’s largest 
industrial facilities. It sets legislated limits – known as baselines – on the greenhouse gas emissions of these 
facilities. These emissions limits will decline, predictably and gradually, and are aimed at helping achieve Australia’s 
emission reduction targets. This baseline decline rate applies to all Safeguard facilities, including existing and new 
facilities. Different rates may be approved for facilities classed as a trade-exposed, baseline-adjusted facility. 
The business with operational control of the facility must ensure its net emissions do not exceed the baseline 
determined by the Clean Energy Regulator.
Safety Maturity Model
The Safety Maturity Model is our framework for managing safety, which enables comparable evaluation and 
learning across the organisation, balancing focus across fatality elimination, and catastrophic event prevention, and 
reducing injuries and illnesses. The model has 4 components: leadership and engagement; risk management; work 
planning and execution; and learning and improvement.
Scope 1, 2 and 3 
greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions
Scope 1 emissions are direct GHG emissions from facilities fully or partially owned or controlled by Rio Tinto. 
They include fuel use, onsite electricity generation, anode and reductant use, process emissions, land management 
and livestock.
Scope 2 emissions are GHG emissions from the electricity, heat or steam brought in from third parties (indirect 
emissions). Scope 2 emissions are reported on a:
•	 location basis, reflecting the average emission intensity of the supply
•	 market basis, reflecting any commercial arrangement we have with our suppliers or the surrender of renewable 
energy certificates, or in the absence of such claims, using the most reasonable estimate of the residual emission 
intensity of the supply.
Scope 3 emissions are indirect GHG emissions generated because of activities undertaken either upstream or 
downstream of our operations. More information on Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions are provided in the Sustainability 
Fact Book and the Scope 1, 2 and 3 Emissions Calculation and Climate Methodology and addendum.
Senior management
Senior management are General Managers, Group Advisers and Chief Advisers, as well as employees in business 
units or in functional leadership roles who are direct reports of Executive Committee members.
Significant environmental 
incident
A significant environmental incident is an incident with an actual consequence rating of High or Very high. 
We measure and rate incidents according to their actual environmental and compliance impacts using 5 severity 
categories: Very low, Low, Moderate, High or Very high. High or Very high environmental incidents are reported to 
the relevant product group head and Rio Tinto Chief Executive as soon as possible.
Site Improvement Plan 
# (SIP)
A Site Improvement Plan is a short term (~5 year) environment improvement initiative being delivered as part of the 
Nature Strategy target program. SIPs are designed to enhance performance for a material risk for air, land, water or 
biodiversity at a specific asset.
Social investments
Social investments are voluntary financial contributions, including in-kind donations of assets and employee time, 
made by Rio Tinto-managed operations to third parties to address identified community needs or social risks.
Sustainable development
Sustainable development is “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs”. (Our Common Future, Report of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development, World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987. Published as Annex to 
General Assembly document A/42/427, Development and International Co-operation: Environment August 2, 1987. 
Available at: undocuments.net/wced-ocf.htm.)
Threatened Species
Species classified as Critically Endangered, Endangered, or Vulnerable under IUCN Red List criteria. (Source: IUCN)
Tier 1 resources
Tier 1 resources are low-cost, expandable resources that are profitable at all phases of the natural price cycle and 
that bring a sustainable competitive advantage.
TNFD (Taskforce on 
Nature-related Financial 
Disclosures)
An initiative developing a framework for organisations to report and act on nature-related risks and opportunities, 
aiming to redirect financial flows toward nature-positive outcomes.
Total greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions
Total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are Scope 1 GHG emissions plus Scope 2 GHG emissions minus net carbon 
credits retired from recognised sources in case of 100% managed basis; and Scope 1 emissions plus Scope 2 
emissions in case of equity basis.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
8
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Term
Definition
Use-of-force (UOF)
Use-of-force refers to the lawful and proportional amount of force (effort) required by authorised security 
personnel to make an unwilling suspect or person comply to achieve a legitimate security objective. It involves the 
use of various means and techniques of force that are applied, from the least to the most force. The UOF is 
governed by country laws and is usually authorised in a progressive series of actions, referred to as a “use-of-force 
continuum”, that makes provision for the use of lesser, non-lethal and graduated force options.
Value add
Value add refers to the value that a business adds to the materials and services it has bought. It is equivalent to the 
sum of all labour payments, payables to governments, returns on capital invested in operations – including interest 
payments, profits paid out to shareholders, and money held in the business for future investment and to replace 
depreciated assets – and non-government payments. This figure includes management costs for the calendar year.
Virtual power purchase 
agreement (VPPA)
A financial contract between a renewable energy developer and a buyer, typically used when a direct physical 
connection to the energy source is not feasible. The developer sells electricity into the grid, while the buyer pays an 
agreed amount and receives renewable energy certificates (RECs) to claim the environmental benefits of the 
renewable energy generated and reduce their Scope 2 market-based emissions.
Wellbeing/wellness 
program
A wellbeing/wellness program is a proactive, preventive approach to help people change their lifestyle to move 
toward a state of optimal health – a balance of physical, emotional, social, spiritual, and intellectual health. It is an 
active process of enhancing awareness and skills, changing behaviour and values, and creating an environment 
that supports good health practices and increases people’s abilities to enjoy a balanced and fulfilling life.
Work associated  
(injury/illness)
For 2025 this category only pertains to chartered commuting and certain business travel incidents.
An injury or illness is work associated when an incident or exposure occurs due to requirements of a person’s 
employment and/or is the result of the conditions in which work takes place. Work associated incidents include 
additional expectations or exposures workers encounter beyond their core responsibilities to perform their role. It 
is reasonable to assume the business can partially manage and/or mitigate the risks associated with these 
incidents, however, there are inherent limitations and external influences involved that may be outside of the 
business’s control.
Work related  
(injury/illness)
An injury or illness is work related if an incident or exposure occurs: 
•	 while a worker is carrying out activities as part of their role, or
•	 the work environment caused or contributed to the injury or illness.
Work related injury or illness also includes aggravation or exacerbation of a pre-existing injury or illness. 
Exacerbation temporarily worsens symptoms, while aggravation is a permanent escalation of a pre-existing 
condition. The work environment is the workplace, any work activity, and any work plant or equipment. It is 
reasonable to assume the business can manage and/or mitigate these incidents.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
9
riotinto.com
Basis of reporting glossary

Materiality descriptors
Biodiversity and ecosystems
Our operations have an inherent impact on the environment and 
nature, both directly and indirectly. This occurs through land and 
habitat disturbance, emissions to land, water and air, and through 
cumulative impacts. This can subsequently impact people who rely 
on the environment and the services it provides. It is imperative 
that these impacts are understood, kept as low as reasonably 
practicable and are progressively restored wherever possible.
Business integrity and governance
Integrity is underpinned by values and behaviours that guide how 
we work together as colleagues, and the way we engage with our 
external communities and stakeholders.
Our business integrity governance includes topics such as bribery 
and corruption, competition, conflicts of interest, benefits, 
sponsorships and donations, fraud and other financial crimes, 
data governance and privacy, and third-party due diligence. 
Governance is fundamentally about considering the right things, 
at the right time with the right people and insights.
It includes strong foundations and rules that enable the Board  
to oversee risks, and to support and challenge the Executive 
Committee, ensuring alignment of our sustainability approach  
to our business strategy.
Business performance
The economic results that we achieve enable us to maximise the 
benefits Rio Tinto and its work deliver to the communities that 
host us. They include the taxes and royalties we pay, the salaries 
and wages of our workforce, the mandated social contributions 
we make to communities, and our payments to suppliers.
Climate change
We prepare our business for the impacts of climate change by 
improving the physical resilience of our assets, measuring and 
mitigating carbon emissions from our operations, and partnering 
with our customers to reduce these emissions through our value 
chains. These measures include energy supply and demand 
management, developing and deploying low-carbon technology, 
considering the physical impacts of climate change on our 
portfolio, and integrating these considerations into our business 
processes.
Closure, post-mining use and 
land rehabilitation
From design to decommissioning, we consider closure through 
the life cycle of assets. This incorporates remediation and any 
long-term management obligations, such as water treatment, 
including of legacy assets.
Cultural heritage management
We are committed to preserving and protecting cultural heritage 
in collaboration with the communities where we operate.
Employment and talent retention
We aim to create a workplace that is safe, inclusive, empowering 
and engaging. We invest in human capital by attracting, 
developing and retaining talent through effective training, 
education and development opportunities that enable 
professional growth.
End-to-end materials management
There is strong consumer and investor focus on our sustainability 
practices, including the way we produce materials. This 
encompasses the full value chain – from responsible sourcing and 
waste management through to the accreditation and certification 
of our products. We also explore ways to develop our 
participation in the circular economy across our value chain by 
minimising waste, maximising the use of minerals and promoting 
the regeneration of natural systems.
ESG transparency and disclosure
We believe that greater transparency and accountability are key 
to building trust and achieving better social and economic 
outcomes over the long term. This includes disclosing information 
about our sustainability performance, taxes paid, beneficial 
ownership and contractual agreements.
Future-proof assets
Portfolio resilience in the face of changing customer needs, 
stakeholder expectations and business models.
Health, safety and wellbeing
The health, safety and wellbeing of our employees, contractors 
and communities is core to our values.
We focus on injury prevention and elimination, mental health, 
reducing exposure to industrial diseases, and on improving 
wellbeing.
Impact of technology
Technological development changes the type of work that we do, 
and how and where we do it. As we continue to automate our 
operations, we look for ways to help our employees and 
communities adapt to changing workforce requirements.
Respect and inclusion
Fostering an inclusive workplace is not just the right thing to do, it 
is essential to our success. We are committed to creating an 
inclusive environment that values the unique perspectives and 
contributions of our whole workforce. 
Industrial environment impacts
We work to prevent and minimise impacts – such as from air, light 
and noise emissions – from our operations on the surrounding 
environments and communities, including management controls 
and programs to help manage inherent risks.
Community relations
Mining by its very nature disturbs land and ecosystems and can 
affect nearby communities. We work to address community 
concerns, maximise benefits and reduce negative impacts. This 
includes how we engage communities, make agreements, and 
support economic and social development.
Pandemic response and public health
We respond swiftly and collaboratively to current and future 
public health crises to protect the health and safety of employees 
and local communities, laying groundwork to support longer-term 
economic recovery and resilience.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
10
riotinto.com

Respecting human rights
Rio Tinto respects the human rights of all people, including the 
communities where we live and work, our employees and 
contractors, workers in our value chain, and others affected  
by our activities and business relationships. We are committed  
to implementing internationally agreed human rights guidance, 
standards and principles as set out in our Human Rights Policy. 
Our salient human rights issues are those that are most likely  
to have severe negative impact on people through our activities 
and business relationships. They include: land access and use; 
Indigenous Peoples’ rights; security; inclusion and diversity; 
community health, safety and wellbeing; workplace health and 
safety; labour rights; and managing climate change impacts and 
just transition. We are working to embed respect for human rights 
across our business, which includes strengthening our processes 
to prevent any involvement in adverse human rights impacts 
through our own activities or business relationships. When we 
identify negative human rights impact that we may have caused or 
contributed to, we commit to provide for, or co-operate in, 
remediation in a manner consistent with the UNGPs.
Responsible tax and royalty payments
Our economic contributions are one part of the legacy we leave 
to the countries and communities where we work. They include 
the responsible payment of taxes and royalties to local and 
national governments. They also include transparency about the 
amounts we pay and beneficial ownership, as transparency 
encourages accountability.
Risk management and cyber security
We prepare for, and respond to, internal and external events that 
have the potential to impact on our business. We also ensure we 
have risk management capabilities and technologies that prevent 
or mitigate the potential impact of critical incidents, data 
breaches, or environmental, health and safety events.
Supply chain transparency
We identify, assess and address risks and opportunities  
within our supply chain. We aim to create strong sustainability  
and social licence by earning trust with partners, customers 
and communities.
Tailings and mineral waste management
Our operations produce mineral waste, including tailings – 
residues created as part of mining, refining, smelting and water 
treatment processes that need to be permanently and safely 
stored. They include water storage facilities at some of our assets.
Water management
Water is a key part of our operational environmental footprint and 
a shared resource critical to sustaining biodiversity, communities 
and their economic prosperity. Our processing plants, refineries, 
smelters and mines use water to process ore, manage dust and 
promote rehabilitation. In some instances, we use water to 
produce hydroelectricity to power our operations. Responsible 
water management aims to ensure that our operational water 
needs are balanced with those of the local communities and 
natural environments, and that impacts due to our operations are 
managed appropriately.
Sustainability Glossary 2025
11
riotinto.com
Materiality descriptors

Rio Tinto plc
6 St James’s Square
London SW1Y 4AD
United Kingdom
Rio Tinto Limited
Level 43, 120 Collins Street
Melbourne VIC 3000
Australia
